# Investigation of possible gender bias in face recognition

The goal of this project is to analyze the effects of facial hair (beard and mustache) on face recognition systems using visualization / interpretation methods and provide understanding of the difference between females and males recognition accuracy that recent neural network based approaches have.

In order to investigate the effects of facial hair on face recognition systems, a neural network is used to check if an image has a beard or / and mustache. Recent neural network based models that can detect beards and mustaches are reviewed and a publicly available pretrained model is picked to find images that have facial hair. Then, face matchers in recent studies are reviewed. Their recognition performance on different datasets are compared and one of the best matchers is used in the experiments. CelebA-HQ dataset is used in this project.

The most important regions when comparing a pair of face images is obtained using a visualization tool. Model agnostic techniques based on input perturbation and gradient based approaches are reviewed. A pair of images is fed to the matcher with variations in facial hair. The matching score and the corresponding saliency maps are evaluated to show how facial hair on a face affects the decision of the neural network.

This project is assumed to show that facial hair can significantly change the performance of a face recognition system. Thus, testing on a balanced dataset for males regarding variation in facial hair can affect the error rates. For example, having a test set that only has males with no facial hair can increase the false accepting rates for male imposter pairs. These findings might give an understanding of why there is a gap between male and female recognition accuracy.
